#Eurovision: The best, worst three hours of you life

It's two hours in. If you hear one more bizarre Eastern European dubstep rap performed by men dressed in space suits you’re going to stab someone. Something, anything different is what you need.  Then it happens. Without warning a man dressed as a cross between Chewbacca and a low-rent Mexican wrestler is screaming into a dead rodent with a microphone sticking out of its throat. Welcome to Eurovision, the yearly spectacle of the strange, the camp and the tacky.
 
To dislike Eurovision because of the lack of quality is to miss the point of Eurovision; its lack of taste is what makes it great. While many disagree on the merits of this ‘musical’ competition, there is a general consensus on one thing: it’s really, really weird. Some see a viciously anti-Russia Ukrainian drag queen as a heavy handed political statement borne out of a national grudge; others see a hilariously excessively viciously anti-Russia Ukrainian drag queen attempting a heavy handed political statement borne out of a national grudge.
 
Eurovision is an absolutely undeniably awful, utterly tasteless collection of rubbish ‘music’. There is no debate; this is not a highbrow television event. Understated and subtle it is not. It exists in the magic zone where something is so, so very bad that it is actually a work of genius. It transcends traditional metrics of quality. Some (the pretentious crowd who watch it for ‘irony’) may call it high art.
 
Eurovision exists in its own unique universe, not held accountable to traditional standards of taste. This is what makes it truly special. Some countries are intentionally bad (Ireland’s singing turkey for example), others unintentionally awful (Albania’s screaming woman in a box).  Both types of entries are great in their own ways - the intentionally bad entries are like a bad acid trip (I feel I should take this opportunity to say that I have never used any form of illegal drugs)  in the world’s most surreal pantomime, while the unintentional bad entries are like failed X Factor auditions with the addition of massive smoke machines, fire and rotating ovens.
 
Some accuse the intentionally bad countries of being cynical and of having an attitude that they are above the competition and that those who enjoy laughing at the unintentionally bad entries are being very snide and turning unfamiliar cultures into a joke. These critiques again miss the whole point of Eurovision. They are true, like the majority of the criticism aimed at Eurovision. While true and valid, it misses the point of the competition entirely. Despite being founded to bring in a new age of cooperation, unity and the broadening of cultural horizons, it has not actually really been about that since the 1970s. The era of sensible Eurovision is long, long gone.
 
But instead of mourning the death of the sensible Eurovision 1.0, we should celebrate the long and continuing (somehow) life of weird Eurovision 2.0.
 
The main problem people seem to have with Eurovision is that they just don’t get it because they cannot get into the correct mind-frame to enjoy it. They seem to view Eurovision with either memories and ideals from Eurovision 1.0 or try to use logic to comprehend what they are seeing. Logic quite simply does not exist in the Eurovision universe; there is absolutely no sense that can be made of the competition. It has a tacky je ne sais quoi about it. It’s impossible to absolutely pin down which can only lead to even more confusion.
 
There is only one way one can view Eurovision: by letting go of all logic. Once logic has been forfeited the enjoyment begins. No longer do you question why a turkey is insulting various European countries, no longer do you wonder when Israel joined Europe (spoiler alert: they never did), no longer do you question if Azerbaijan is even anywhere near a European country. Once you just leave behind all critical thinking ability you start to enjoy this truly bizarre spectacle.
 
If you can not view Eurovision for what it is, you’re probably better off getting your exposure to the culture of Europe from Scandinavian political dramas.

Although, before you retire to your boxset of Borgen, I ask you this: how many Latvian pirates appear on Borgan and do the full dance routine for Madonna’s ‘Vogue’ to a generic electronic europop track?
 
In conclusion, Eurovision is a bizarre spectacle which has no logical explanation and by all traditional metrics of quality is absolutely rubbish. Yet, when viewed with the right mindset, it is absolutely wonderful. And long may the psychedelic opera continue.
 